Intro
SC in 2024 ruled that States can collect royalty and also tax major minerals, and can also regulate industrial
alcohol opening up a significant source of revenue for states.
Federalism is basic structure : Kesavanada Bharti v. State of Kerala (1973), SR Bommai v. Union of India (1994)
KC Wheare famously characterised India as ‘quasi-federal’ and others like CH Alexandrowicz raised the question of
whether Indian should in fact be called a federation at all; end of one party rule in 1967 has been a turning point in
federal aspirations in the country
Legislative Relations
Art 245 (Subject to CoI provisions),
Art 245 (Subject to CoI provisions),
Parl can make laws for whole/part of Territory of India
State can make laws for territory of the state
Parl can make extra territorial laws (effect abroad)
Art 246
Union List - Parl, State List - States, Concurrent List - Parl & State (Parl>States),
For UTs without legislatures, Parl can make law.
Art 248 : Residuary Powers : (not in any list) -
Only Parl can make laws (supported by Entry 97 - List I)
Art 254 : Concurrent List Conflict
Inconsistency/Repugnancy between Union & State Laws in Concurrent List
Subject Wise Distribution
Union List (97 Subjects):
National Imp.
Exclusive Parl. Powers
Uniform Laws
State List (66 Subjects):
Local Importance
Exclusive State Powers
Concurrent List (47 Subjects)
Both Parl. & State can make laws
Jurisprudence
1.Art 245 (Subject to CoI provisions),
a.Parl can make laws for whole/part of Territory of India
b.State can make laws for territory of the state
c.Parl can make extra territorial laws (effect abroad)
2.Doctrine of Territorial Nexus
a.State normally cannot make laws having an effect outside the state unless there is enough connection between
the State and the subject matter of the law.
i.State of Bombay v R.M.D.C (1957) : the connection must be real and not illusory (i.e. it should be on the basis
of a valid law) and the liability sought to be imposed must be pertinent to that connection (i.e. law selects some
fact which provide some connection with the State).
ii.Tata Steel v. State of Bihar (1958) : The nexus theory does not impose a tax, it only indicates circumstances in
which a.tax imposed by a legislature may be enforced in a particular case.
iii.State of Bihar v Charusila Das (1959) : A-State legislature has power to legislate with respect.to charitable and
religious trusts situated within its territoryg even though any part of trust property, small or large may be
situated in another State.]
iv.Electronics Corp., India v C.I. T (1989) : law having extra-territorial operation can be banned by ParliamenL but
such law must have nexus with somethin*in India
Mains Concise Note (MCN) 15 : Federalism : Essentials & Core Relations
MCN 2.0
 
Magna Carta Mains 2026
courses.atishmathur.com 	tracker.atishmathur.com 	upscpath.com

-- 1 of 30 --

1.Art 246
i.Union List - Parl, State List - States, Concurrent List - Parl & State (Parl>States),
ii.For UTs without legislatures, Parl can make law.
a.Autonomy to Centre and States (Legislative Powers) (Javed v Stale of Haryana (2003)
b.Plenary Power of Legislature
i.Entries should not be read in narrow or restricted sense [State of W B. Union of India 1963)]
ii.Retrospective & Prospective Laws (Rai Ramkrishna v State of Bihar (1963)
iii.No power to enact a provision that undermines an individual decision of the court affecting the rights and
liabilities of parties (l.N. Sorena v State of M.P., 1976)
c.Liberal and Harmonious Construction : There is no clear-cut division of powers between the Union and States. Thus,
in case of conflict the judiciary has to make reconciliation attempts between the conflicting entries
i.ITC Ltd v. APMC (2002)
1.The various entries in the three lists of the 7th Schedule are not powers of legislation but the "fields of
legislation". Competency has to be traced back to the Constitution.
2.When reconciliation is not possible, then the court will have to examine the entries wrt legislative power in
the Constitution
3.The need for power-sharing devices between the Centre and the'State must be subordinated to State's
security and stability
4.The Constitution deserves to be interpreted so that does not whittle down the powers of the State
Legislature and preserves the federalism while also upholding the Central supremacy
5.Entries should be read together without giving a narrow or restricted meaning to any of them.
6.An absolute or watertight compartmentalisation of heads of subject for legislation may not be possible
ii.GJ University v KR Mudholkar (1963)
1. Gujarat lacks legislative competence under the State List to prescribe any particular medium of instruction
in respect of higher education as it interferes with the power of Union Parliament under List I -
coordination and determination of standards in institutions of higher education.
d.Ancillary or Incidental Powers
i.The power to legislate on a topic of legislation carries with it the power to legislate on an ancillary matter
which can be said to be reasonably included in the power given. (United Provinces v. Atiqa Begum, 1941)
1.Eg - to legislate w.r.t. land includes the power w.r.t. mortgages of land as a subsidiary subject.
ii.Punitive measures for enforcing social legislation are part of the ancillary powers. (Joshi v Mills, 1977)
iii.Expressions 'incidental' and 'ancillary' powers mean the powers which are required to be exercised for the
proper and effective exercise of legislative powers expressly conferred
1.Power to levy tax would NOT include power to confiscate goods as ancillary
e.Pith and Substance Rule
i.When a law dealing with a subject in one list touching on a subject in another list
ii.Prafulla Kumar v. Bank of Commerce (1947)
1.Object, Scope, Effect of the Act to be considered
2.The extent of invasion by a legislature is not for determining the validity of law, but for determining the
pith and substance of impugned Act.
3.Where three lists are in conflict List I has priority over List II and lll, and List III over Il.
iii.M Ismail Faruqui v UOI (1995) : the pith and substance of the legislation was acquisition of property and not
related to public order and therefore the Act was valid law.
f.Doctrine of Colourable Legislation
i.Applied when the transgression is disguised, covert and indirect; made to appear as if it were quite
constitutional. (you cannot do indirectly what you cannot do directly)
ii.KC Gajapati Deo v. State of Orissa (1953) About competency not intent (bona fides or malafide) on the part of
the legislature.
iii.State of Bihar v. Kameshwar Singh (1952) : Bihar land reforms Act struck down
iv.Naga People s Movement for Human Rights v Union of India : Court upheld AFSPA
Mains Concise Note (MCN) 16 : Federalism : Legislative Relations & Doctrines	
MCN 2.0
Magna Carta Mains 2026
courses.atishmathur.com 	tracker.atishmathur.com 	upscpath.com

-- 2 of 30 --

1.Art 254
i.Repugnancy/Inconsistency between Union & State Laws (Concurrent list)
ii.Means that conflicting results are produced when both the laws of State as well as Union Legislature with respect
to Concurrent List are applied to the same facts.
iii.Conflict between a Union and a State law, the former prevails. (Art 254)
iv.In order that, the State law should prevail in that State (G.C. Kanungo v State of Orissa, 1995)
1.there must be in existence a Union Law
2.subsequent to the Union law the State legislature enacts a law with respect to a matter in the Concurrent List
3.the State law having been reserved for the President's consideration, has received his assent thereto.
4.However, the proviso to Art. 254(2) lays down that Parliament may again supersede State legislation which has
been assented to by the President under clause (2) by making a law on the same matter
a.Tests for repugnancy
i.Deep Chand v. State of UP (1959)
1.Direct Conflict- Direct conflict between the two (one say 'do other 'don't') - State and Union law. Thus, an
inconsistency in the actual terms of the two statutes.
2.Occupied Field- No apparent conflict, yet repugnancy because both cover the same field.
3.Intended Occupation : Parliament intended to lay down an exhaustive code in respect of subject matter
replacing the State Act, or because a law may be in conflict with the intention of the dominant law to cover the
whole field.
ii.Karunanidhi v. Union of India (1979)
1.Where two statutes occupy a particular field, but there is possibility of both operating in same field without
colliding then there is no repugnancy.
2.No inconsistency, but a statute occupying same field seeks to create distinct and separate offences, then there
is no repugnancy.
PREDOMINANCE OF UNION LAW AND LIMITATIONS OF STATE LEGISLATURES
State lists to be interpreted as per Union and Concurrent List (Art 246)
Concurrent Lists : Union > State (Art 254)
Union List has most subjects
Residuary powers with the Parliament (Art 248)
Scenarios where Parliament can makes laws on State List Subjects :
RS passes a resolution with Special Maj I in National Interest or GST related laws authorising the Parl to make law on state list
entries (Art 249)
Such a law can be made for entire/partial Territory of India till validity of the resolution
Resolution is valid for a year and can be extended for 1 more year by same majority
During National Emergency, Parliament can make laws on all lists incl. state list. and GST for entire/partial Territory of India (Art
250)
Only when the Parl actually makes laws under Art 249/250 is when state laws/law making powers becomes restricted. Even if
resolutions and proclamations are passed/issued respectively, unless follow up Parl Laws are made, state powers are not restricted
(Art 251)
2 or more states pass a resolution using simple majority authorising the Parl to make a law on the State List (Art 252)
States can make laws on the subject then, Other states can also adopt the same law by passing a resolution using simple maj.
Such a law made can only be amended by the Parliament and not the State legislatures concerned.
If law needs to be made on a state list subject to implement an international treaty, the Parl can without any spl permission. (Art
253)
Pres. can authorise the Parl. to exercise powers of the concerned state legislature during Pres Rule (Art 356)
Parl. can make laws for Union Territories without a legislature/any territory not a state on any subject in any list (Art 246)
Parl. can set up courts for better administration of Union Laws (Art 247)
A bill imposing reasonable restrictions in public interest on inter/intra state trade and commerce w.r.t a specific state cannot be
introduced in that specific state without prior recommendation of the President [Art 304(b)]
Governor can reserve any bill for President (Art 200) (Governor’s constitutional discretion, not bound by State CoM Advice)
State Bills that should/must be reserved for Pres. Assent by Governor after being passed by the state legislatures
state bill about land acquisition/merging companies etc. (proviso to Art 31A)
state bill implementing Art 39(b)(c) (proviso to Art 31C)
state bill adversely affecting the powers of the HC as envisaged in CoI (proviso to Art 200)
state bill on concurrent list when central law exists (exception of Union Law > State Law in Concurrent List) [Art 254(2)]
state bill taxing water/electricity provided by any authority created by Parl Law [Art 288(2)]
state money and financial bills (I and II) passed during Financial Emergency if such direction issued [Art 360(4)(ii)]
courses.atishmathur.com 	tracker.atishmathur.com 	upscpath.com
MCN 2.0
 
Magna Carta Mains 2026
Mains Concise Note (MCN) 17 : Federalism : Repugnancy & Legislative Dominance

-- 3 of 30 --

Type 	Approval, Extension, Revocation 	Grounds, Impact, Conditions
National
(Art 352)
Approval
LS & RS both should pass with Spl Maj
II within 30 days.
Extension/Duration
Indefinitely, 6 months at a time.
Revocation
By Pres
LS - simple Maj.
If LS not in session, 1/10 members
can send a notice to Spkr/Pres
expressing intent to end emergency.
th
Special sitting must be conducted
in 14 days.
Grounds
Indian security threatened by external aggression/armed
rebellion (previously internal disturbance till 44 CA, 1978)	
th
Imposed thrice
1961 & 71 : external aggression
1975 : internal disturbance
Conditions (Art 353 & Art 354)
Union Cabinet must recommend Nat. Emergency to Pres. in
writing (44 CA, 1978)	
th
Proclamation valid for 6 months.
Can be imposed if before, during, and after external
aggression/armed rebellion
If LS is dissolved, then RS approval for time being is valid, LS
can approve within 30 days of next session.
Art 20 & 21 can’t be suspended (44 CA, 1978)	
th
Only emergency laws are protected from being challenged in
court of law and no other laws which are not related to the
emergency
(44 CA, 1978)	th
Impact (Art 353 & Art 354)
Union executive power shall extend to the giving of any
direction to any State in the declared emergency area
Parl. can make laws on State List
President can alter the distribution of revenues that are
normally for states
such orders to be placed immediately before Parl.
LS and SLA can be extended by 1 yr at a time & not
extending in any case beyond a period of six months after
the proclamation ceased to exist
Art 19 automatically suspended but only when grounds are
ext. aggression (44 CA, 1978)	th
such orders to be placed immediately before Parl. (44
CA, 1978)
th
(National Emergency makes India Unitary, it does not lead to
dissolution/suspension of State Legislatures/Executive)
Intro
Inspired mainly by the Weimar Constitution of Germany, US and Australia
In times of crisis, the Constitution dons its armour — but does it risk losing its soul? - J. HR Khanna
Type of
Emergency
Frequency Notable
Instances
National 	3
1962 (China),
1971 (Pakistan),
1975 (Internal
Disturbance)
State (Art 356) 	~100
First in Punjab
(1951), frequent
use in 1970s-
90s
Financial 	0 Never
proclaimed
courses.atishmathur.com 	tracker.atishmathur.com 	upscpath.com
MCN 2.0
 
Magna Carta Mains 2026
Mains Concise Note (MCN) 18 : Emergency

-- 4 of 30 --

Issues with National Emergency and Impact on Federalism
Concentration of Power: During national emergencies, the Union government assumes sweeping powers, diminishing the
autonomy of states.
Suspension of Federal Structure: Parliament can legislate on State List subjects, and the Union can issue binding
directions to states.
Impact on Fundamental Rights: Article 19 rights are suspended (except in cases of armed rebellion post-44th
Amendment), and the President can suspend the right to approach courts for enforcement of other fundamental rights.
Extension of Legislatures’ Tenure: The life of Lok Sabha and State Assemblies can be extended, potentially undermining
democratic processes.
Landmark Judgements
Minerva Mills v. Union of India (1980): Affirmed that
the proclamation of emergency is subject to judicial
review, though courts can only examine if constitutional
limitations were observed, not the adequacy of the
reasons.
ADM Jabalpur v. Shiv Kant Shukla (1976): Known as
the Habeas Corpus case, the Supreme Court
controversially held that during emergency, the right to
life and liberty could be suspended, denying access to
courts. This judgment has been widely criticised and
later effectively overturned by the 44th Amendment,
which made Articles 20 and 21 non-suspendable
Global Best Practices for National Emergencies
Strict Judicial Oversight: Countries like Germany
and the US require judicial or legislative oversight for
emergency declarations.
Time-Bound Proclamations: Emergencies are
generally time-limited and require periodic
legislative approval.
Protection of Core Rights: Some constitutions
safeguard certain fundamental rights even during
emergencies (e.g., Germany’s Basic Law).
Transparency and Accountability: Public disclosure
of reasons and parliamentary debates are mandated
in several democracies
Solutions for Better Usage of National Emergency
Strengthen Parliamentary Oversight: Ensure regular review and approval by both Houses of Parliament.
Judicial Review: Maintain robust judicial review to prevent abuse.
Safeguard Fundamental Rights: Ensure non-derogation of basic rights, especially life and liberty.
Clear Criteria: Define clear, objective criteria for declaring emergencies.
Public Accountability: Encourage transparency and public debate on the necessity and scope of emergency measure
State
(Art 356)
Approval
LS & RS both should pass with Simple
Maj within 60 days.
Extension
3 years, 6 months at a time
Can only be extended beyond 1 yr if
National Emergency is also imposed
or Election Commission certifies that
it is difficult to hold elections to
concerned SLA.
Revocation
By Pres
Grounds - failure of a state’s consti. machinery
Union Government duty to protect States against ext.
aggression and int. disturbance & ensure CoI is followed in
the states (C>S)
Conditions
Governor may recommend but can be imposed even without
it.
SLA cant be dissolved before Parliament approves state
emergency (SR Bommai, 1994)
If LS is dissolved, then RS approval for time being is valid, LS
can approve within 30 days of next session.
Impact
President may assume to herself any state govt function and
all or any of the powers vested in or exercisable by the
Governor or anybody or authority in the state other than the
State Leg.
(this allows for suspension/termination of state executive)
Pres. may declare that State Leg powers shall be exercisable
by or under the authority of Parl
HC powers can’t be subsumed by the Pres.
courses.atishmathur.com 	tracker.atishmathur.com 	upscpath.com
MCN 2.0
 
Magna Carta Mains 2026
Mains Concise Note (MCN) 18 : Emergency

-- 5 of 30 --

Issues with State Emergency and Impact on Federalism
Frequent Misuse: Article 356 has been used nearly 100 times, often for political reasons rather than genuine breakdowns of
constitutional machinery.
Erosion of State Autonomy: The President can assume state functions, suspend legislatures, and centralise power,
undermining the federal structure.
Democratic Deficit: Dismissal of elected governments without adequate justification damages democratic norms.
Judicial Concerns: Courts have noted that misuse of Article 356 can damage the fabric of federalism.
Landmark Judgements
State of Rajasthan v. Union of India (1977): Held that the President’s satisfaction is not beyond judicial review if exercised
mala fide or on irrelevant grounds.
S.R. Bommai v. Union of India (1994): A landmark case that established:
Article 356 should be used sparingly.
Floor tests are essential to determine majority.
Proclamations are subject to judicial review.
Assemblies cannot be dissolved before parliamentary approval.
Courts can restore dismissed governments and assemblies if the proclamation is struck down.
Rameshwar Prasad v. Union of India (2006): Dissolution of a freshly elected assembly on the ground of anticipated horse-
trading was held unconstitutional
Global Best Practices for State Emergencies
Federal Balance: In the US and Australia, federal intervention in states is rare and usually requires state consent or clear
constitutional grounds.
Judicial and Legislative Safeguards: Checks and balances ensure that central intervention is not arbitrary.
Clear Grounds: Well-defined, objective grounds for intervention are stipulated.
Way Forward (Sarkaria)
Exhaust Alternatives: All possible remedies at the state level should be tried before invoking
Governor’s Report: Should be a ‘speaking document’ with detailed material facts.
Parliamentary Approval: Strict adherence to periodic review and approval by Parliament.
Judicial Review: Continued robust judicial oversight to prevent misuse.
Public Awareness: Media and civil society should play a role in monitoring and critiquing misuse
Proper Grounds
Hung Assembly scenario
Corruption, maladministration,
Acting contrary to the Constitution
Acting contrary to the Union directives
Failure to meet an extraordinary situation
Security Concerns
Improper Grounds
Improper action by Governor in case of political
instability
Overwhelming defeat in the Lok Sabha elections
Power used merely for achieving good
Government
Situation of 'internal disturbance’
Emergency provisions test the resilience of a democracy — not by how swiftly power is centralised in crisis, but by how quickly it is
relinquished once the crisis is over.
India’s constitutional architects envisioned emergency powers as a necessary evil — to protect the nation, not to dominate its people.
Type 	Approval, Extension, Revocation 	Grounds, Impact, Conditions
Financial
(Art 360)
Approval
LS & RS both should pass with Simple
Maj within 60 days.
Extension/Duration
Indefinitely
Revocation
By Pres
Grounds
threat to Indian financial stability or credit
Conditions (Art 353 & Art 354)
Pres must be satisfied of the situation
If LS is dissolved, then RS approval for time being is valid, LS
can approve within 30 days of next session.
Impact (Art 353 & Art 354)
Union can give any direction to states to observe financial
prudence such as reducing salaries of state employees
President can also issue similar directions such as reducing
salaries of union employees, SC/HC judges.
courses.atishmathur.com 	tracker.atishmathur.com 	upscpath.com
MCN 2.0
 
Magna Carta Mains 2026
Mains Concise Note (MCN) 18 : Emergency

-- 6 of 30 --

Intro
The core objective is to match resources with responsibilities, promote equity, and maintain macroeconomic
stability within a federal structure
In a diverse and complex nation like India, fiscal federalism acts as the economic glue that binds different regions
together, enabling each to pursue development while contributing to a collective national vision.
Challenges to Centre-State Financial Relations
(Puncchi)
1.Vertical Imbalance: States have significant expenditure
responsibilities but limited revenue powers, leading to
dependence on central transfers.
2.Horizontal Imbalance: Wide disparities in fiscal capacity
and development among states.
3.Proliferation of Centrally Sponsored Schemes (CSS):
These schemes often encroach on state subjects, reduce
state autonomy, and create rigidities in expenditure.
4.Rise in Cess and Surcharges: These are not shareable with
states, shrinking the divisible pool and reducing states’
share in central revenues.
5.Compliance Costs: States bear costs of implementing
central legislation without adequate compensation.
6.Borrowing Restrictions: States’ borrowing is subject to
central approval, limiting fiscal autonomy.
7.Data and Transparency Issues: Inconsistent and non-
uniform fiscal reporting across states hampers effective
monitoring and policy formulation.
Solutions to Centre-State Financial Relations
1.Rationalise CSS: Reduce the number and scope of
centrally sponsored schemes, increase untied transfers,
and allow states greater flexibility in spending.
2.Expand Divisible Pool: Limit the use of cess and
surcharges, or compensate states for revenue lost to
these instruments.
3.Strengthen State Revenue Base: Empower states to levy
more taxes or share buoyant taxes like GST at all levels,
including local governments.
4.Institutional Reforms: Strengthen State Finance
Commissions (SFCs), improve data transparency, and
establish independent fiscal councils for oversight.
5.Borrowing Reforms: Align state borrowing limits with
fiscal sustainability, but provide more flexibility for
productive investments.
6. Outcome-Based Transfers: Link transfers to performance
and outcomes in key sectors, while ensuring equity and
addressing regional disparities
15 Finance Commission - Review	th
Tax Devolution
States’ share in central taxes set at 41% for 2021-26 (down from 42% to account for J&K and Ladakh becoming
union territories).
Criteria for Horizontal Devolution
Income Distance - 45%
Area - 15%
Population (2011) Census - 15%
Demographic Performance - 12.5%
Forest & Ecology - 10%
Tax & Fiscal 2.5%
Grants
Revenue Deficit Grants: ₹2.9 lakh crore to 17 states.
Sector-Specific Grants: ₹1.3 lakh crore for health, education, agriculture, judiciary, statistics, aspirational
districts/blocks, and roads.
State-Specific Grants: ₹49,599 crore for social needs, governance, water, sanitation, culture, infrastructure, and
tourism.
Local Bodies: ₹4.36 lakh crore, including performance-linked grants and health grants.
Disaster Management: ₹1.6 lakh crore corpus for state disaster management funds.
Fiscal Roadmap
Fiscal deficit targets: Centre to reduce to 4% of GDP by 2025-26; states to 3% of GSDP by 2023-26.
Extra borrowing of 0.5% of GSDP for states undertaking power sector reforms.
Recommendations for rationalising GST rates, strengthening property tax, and improving fiscal transparency
courses.atishmathur.com 	tracker.atishmathur.com 	upscpath.com
MCN 2.0
 
Magna Carta Mains 2026
Mains Concise Note (MCN) 19 : Fiscal Federalism, 15 FCth

-- 7 of 30 --

Strengths
1.Maintained objectivity in tax devolution
criteria, balancing equity (income distance,
demographic performance) and efficiency
(tax effort).
2.Recognised the need for sector- and
state-specific grants to address unique
challenges.
3.Emphasised fiscal discipline, transparency,
and the need to rationalise GST and
property taxes.
4.Recommended strengthening local bodies
and disaster management funding.
Criticisms
1.Shrinking Divisible Pool: The effective share of states in total central
revenues is eroded by the rising use of cesses and surcharges, which are
not shareable.
2.Horizontal Imbalance: The use of 2011 Census population data and
demographic performance criteria led to discontent, especially among
southern states that controlled population growth but lost share94.
3.Complexity and Scope Creep: Expanded terms of reference (ToR)
included performance incentives, defense funding, and other tasks,
diluting focus and increasing workload.
4.Conditional Grants to Local Bodies: Increased conditionality on grants to
urban local bodies, limiting their flexibility and effectiveness.
5.Limited Progress on Fiscal Autonomy: Recommendations for rationalising
CSS and increasing state autonomy were not fully implemented.
Critical Analysis of the 15th Finance Commission Recommendations
1.Vertical and Horizontal Fiscal Imbalances: Persistent disparities in revenue and expenditure responsibilities.
2.Shrinking Divisible Pool: Continued rise in cesses and surcharges reduces states’ share in central taxes4
3.Regional Disparities: Widening gaps in per capita income and fiscal capacity among states.
4.Urban Local Government Finance: Low and conditional intergovernmental transfers to urban local bodies; inadequate
compensation for loss of revenue post-GST.
5.Climate Change and New Mandates: Need to address climate resilience and emerging expenditure needs.
6.Data and Transparency: Non-uniform fiscal reporting and lack of timely, standardised data.
Challenges Before the 16th Finance Commission and Prognosis
States’ Fiscal Health
Determinants
1.Revenue Mobilisation: Ability to raise own tax and non-tax revenues relative
to GSDP and total expenditure8.
2.Quality of Expenditure: Proportion of developmental and capital expenditure
in total spending.
3.Fiscal Prudence: Fiscal and revenue deficit ratios to GSDP.
4.Debt Sustainability: Debt-to-GSDP ratio, interest payments to revenue
receipts, and growth differential between GSDP and interest payments.
5.Expenditure Efficiency: Targeted and outcome-based spending, especially in
social and infrastructure sectors.
6.Transparency and Data Quality: Timely, accurate, and standardised fiscal
reporting.
7.Institutional Strength: Functioning of SFCs, fiscal responsibility legislation, and
public financial management systems.
Fiscal Reforms Undertaken by State
1.Fiscal Responsibility Legislation (FRLs)
2.Medium-Term Fiscal Policy Statements
3.Direct Benefit Transfers (DBT):
4.Adoption of GST
5.Pension Reforms
6.Modernisation of Tax Administration
7.Market Borrowings
8.Expenditure Rationalisation
Way Forward
1.Enhance Revenue Mobilisation: Broaden tax base, improve property tax, strengthen non-tax revenue sources, and leverage
digital tools for compliance.
2.Improve Expenditure Efficiency: Adopt outcome and climate budgeting, prioritize high-impact sectors, and rationalise subsidies.
3.Promote Fiscal Transparency: Standardise and publish timely fiscal data, including off-budget borrowings and contingent
liabilities.
4.Strengthen Local Bodies: Empower local governments with greater fiscal autonomy, timely transfers, and capacity building.
5.Debt Management: Develop clear, time-bound debt consolidation plans, align with macroeconomic objectives, and improve
reporting.
6.Adopt Innovative Financing: Explore green bonds, blended finance, and public-private partnerships, especially for climate and
infrastructure needs.
7.Institutionalise Performance Monitoring: Use independent fiscal councils, strengthen SFCs, and encourage regular service
delivery benchmarking.
8. Foster Cooperative Federalism: Engage in regular and meaningful Centre-State consultations on fiscal matters, and advocate
for rationalization of CSS and greater flexibility in fiscal management.
courses.atishmathur.com 	tracker.atishmathur.com 	upscpath.com
MCN 2.0
 
Magna Carta Mains 2026
Mains Concise Note (MCN) 19 : Fiscal Federalism, 15 FCth

-- 8 of 30 --

Feature 	15th Finance Commission 	16th Finance Commission
Chairperson 	N. K. Singh 	Arvind Panagariya
Award period 	2021-22 to 2025-26 (plus 2020-21) 	2026-27 to 2030-31
Constitutional article 	Article 280 	Article 280
Criterion 	15th FC Weight 	16th FC Weight 	Implication
Income distance (per
capita GSDP) 45% 	42.50% Slight dilution of pure equity; still
dominant redistributive factor.
Population (2011) 	15% 	17.50% More weight to population‑linked
expenditure needs.
Demographic
performance 12.50% 	10% Incentive for population control
continues but less emphatic.
Area 	15% 	10% Some reduction of advantage to
large-area states.
Forest cover / ecology 	10% 	10% Continuity in rewarding ecological
services.
Tax & fiscal efforts 	2.50% 	– 16th FC drops explicit tax-effort
criterion.
Contribution to GDP 	– 	10% New efficiency / growth-oriented
parameter.
Total 	100% 	100% 	Rebalancing equity and efficiency.
The 15th and 16th Finance Commissions are similar in vertical devolution (both give states 41% of the divisible pool) but differ quite sharply in
horizontal formula, grant design, and the overall philosophy of “equity vs performance”
Vertical devolution (Centre vs States)
States’ share in divisible pool:
15th FC: 41% of the divisible pool of central taxes.
16th FC: Retains 41%, imparting a sense of “semi-permanence”.
Divisible pool definition: Gross central tax revenue minus cost of collection, cesses and surcharges; only this net amount
is shared.
Key point: The quantum (41%) is the same, but the 16th FC grapples more explicitly with the problem that rising cesses
and surcharges shrink the effective pool available to states.
“Grand bargain” idea (16th FC):
Proposes that states accept a smaller percentage share in return for a larger divisible pool if the Centre merges many
cesses/surcharges into shareable taxes.
This responds to state concerns about vertical fiscal imbalance but without raising the 41% figure
16th FC: Explicitly discontinues revenue deficit grants, sector-specific grants, and state-specific grants.
Replaces these with more rule-based and performance-linked instruments, aligning transfers with compliance and
outcomes rather than negotiated entitlement.
Horizontal devolution formula (among states)
The biggest changes are in criteria and weights used to distribute the 41% among states.
courses.atishmathur.com 	tracker.atishmathur.com 	upscpath.com
MCN 2.0
 	Magna Carta Mains 2026
Mains Concise Note (MCN) 20 : 15th FC v 16 FCth

-- 9 of 30 --

Intro
Area 	Recommendation 	Significance
Vertical devolution States’ share retained at 41% of divisible
pool
Continuity with 15th FC; but concern
remains because cesses/surcharges reduce
the effective shareable pool.
Transparency Union to disclose CAG-certified net
proceeds under Article 279
Improves trust in actual divisible pool
computation.
Horizontal devolution
New formula: income distance, population,
demographic performance, area, forest,
contribution to GDP
Attempts to balance equity and efficiency.
Grants-in-aid No revenue deficit grants; no sector-
specific or State-specific grants
Major departure from previous FCs;
pushes States towards own reforms.
Local bodies 	₹7,91,493 crore for RLBs and ULBs 	Stronger focus on the third tier.
Urban local governments ₹3,56,257 crore, including special
infrastructure and urbanisation premium Recognition of India’s urban transition.
Rural local bodies 	₹4,35,236 crore Continues support to Panchayati Raj
institutions with performance conditions.
Disaster management ₹2,04,401 crore corpus for SDRF and
SDMF
Strengthens disaster response and
mitigation framework.
Fiscal discipline States’ fiscal deficit capped at 3% of GSDP;
off-budget borrowings discouraged
Aims at fiscal transparency and debt
sustainability.
Subsidies and transfers Review, rationalisation, sunset clauses,
better targeting
Responds to concerns over unconditional
cash transfers and fiscal populism.
courses.atishmathur.com 	tracker.atishmathur.com 	upscpath.com
Constituted under Article 280 of the Constitution and chaired by economist Dr. Arvind Panagariya, tasked with
addressing India's two structural fiscal challenges:
Vertical imbalance – the mismatch between the Centre's revenue-raising capacity and the States' expenditure
responsibilities.
Horizontal imbalance – disparities in fiscal capacity and development needs among States.
Operated in the context of an upcoming delimitation exercise tied to the next Census, growing fiscal stress in
States from COVID-19, GST rate rationalisation (September 2025), rising "freebie"/cash-transfer spending by
States, and persistent Centre–State friction over cess and surcharges eating into the shareable tax pool.
Key recommendations
MCN 2.0
 	Magna Carta Mains 2026
Mains Concise Note (MCN) 21 : 16th FC Review : Centre, State, Local

-- 10 of 30 --

courses.atishmathur.com 	tracker.atishmathur.com 	upscpath.com
Analysis
Vertical devolution: 41% retained, but the real issue is the base
41% of a shrinking divisible pool may not mean 41% of total Union tax effort. Cesses and surcharges are excluded
from the divisible pool.
Union should disclose data on net proceeds as certified by the CAG under Article 279, because States often dispute
the effective size of the shareable pool
Horizontal devolution: equity retained, efficiency added
The most important innovation is the 10% weight for contribution to GDP, replacing the earlier tax and fiscal effort
criterion
The contribution criterion is moderated by using the square root of GSDP, so that economically larger States are
rewarded but not overwhelmingly
The southern States’ combined share has improved compared to the 15th FC.
The GDP contribution criterion may not fully capture “effort”. GSDP reflects history, geography, infrastructure, ports,
agglomeration, private investment and past public investment, not merely current State policy. Dropping the explicit
tax/fiscal effort criterion may weaken the direct incentive for revenue mobilisation.
Grants-in-aid: a major shift away from gap-filling
The Commission has not recommended revenue deficit grants, sector-specific grants or State-specific grants. It
observed that States have scope to increase revenue and rationalise expenditure
It discourages permanent dependence on gap-filling transfers and encourages States to improve own tax revenue,
control committed expenditure, rationalise subsidies and borrow transparently.
A uniform rejection of revenue deficit grants may hurt States with genuine structural disadvantages — hilly terrain,
disaster vulnerability, low tax base, high service delivery costs or historical backwardness.
Article 275 grants can be an equalisation tool for critical services such as health and education. A more nuanced
approach could have distinguished between avoidable revenue deficits and structural fiscal gaps.
Rural and urban local self-government grants
The basic and performance components are divided in an 80:20 ratio. The aggregate basic and performance grant is
split between RLBs and ULBs in a 60:40 ratio, reflecting projected urbanisation and higher urban service delivery
costs.
Entry-level conditions for local body grants
Local bodies are duly constituted under Parts IX and IX-A.
Provisional and audited accounts are placed online in the public domain.
State Finance Commissions are constituted regularly and Action Taken Reports are laid before State legislatures
within six months of SFC report submission.
This is a strong institutional reform because it links money with elections, accounts, SFCs and transparency.
Urban local self-governments: major recognition, but with conditions
16th FC has raised the urban share in local government grants to 45%, compared with about 36% under the 15th
FC; highest urban share in Finance Commission history
Substantial increase in untied grants, giving cities more autonomy for local needs
Urban Innovations
Special Infrastructure Component: ₹56,100 crore is earmarked for comprehensive wastewater management in
selected urban growth centres with population between 10 lakh and 40 lakh, as per the 2011 Census.
Urbanisation Premium: ₹10,000 crore is provided as a one-time incentive for planned rural-to-urban transition. It
supports the merger of peri-urban villages into adjoining ULBs with population of at least one lakh, subject to a
State rural-urban transition policy.
Own Source Revenue focus: ULB grants among States are distributed using 90% projected urban population and
10% OSR-linked criterion. Performance grants are tied to OSR growth.
Service delivery transparency: The Commission recommends continuation and extension of Service Level
Benchmarks to all ULBs, with third-party assessment or audit to improve reliability
One of the most progressive parts of the 16th FC. India’s urban governance has long suffered from “functions without
finances”. Cities contribute disproportionately to GDP and public revenue, but municipal finances remain weak. By
increasing the urban share and adding special infrastructure grants, the Commission recognises that urbanisation is not
merely a demographic trend but a fiscal and governance challenge.
MCN 2.0
 	Magna Carta Mains 2026
Mains Concise Note (MCN) 21 : 16th FC Review : Centre, State, Local

-- 11 of 30 --

Concern 	Explanation
Conditionality burden Weak ULBs may fail accounts, OSR or performance
conditions and lose funds despite higher need.
OSR benchmark challenge Poorer municipalities may struggle to raise user charges or
property tax without political and administrative support.
Urbanisation premium risk States may merge peri-urban villages for grants without
adequate planning, staffing and service integration.
Limited climate focus Wastewater is important, but cities also need heat, flooding,
air pollution and resilience financing.
State control remains high Municipal autonomy still depends on State laws, staffing,
taxation powers and SFC implementation.
Concerns with urban local governments
Thus, the 16th FC gives cities a larger fiscal window, but real urban transformation will depend on municipal capacity, State-
level devolution and credible project pipelines.
Rural local self-governments: continuity with fiscal discipline
For inter-State distribution of RLB grants, the formula is 90% projected rural population for 2026 and 10% area.
Within States, grants should follow accepted SFC recommendations; in their absence, three-tier States follow 80% to
Gram Panchayats, 10% to Block Panchayats and 10% to District Panchayats.
Gram Panchayats must meet OSR targets: either 1.025 times the previous year’s OSR or 2.5% compounded annual
growth over 2025–26 OSR, whichever is lower, subject to a benchmark of ₹1,200 per household per annum from all
OSR streams. Block Panchayats qualify if 75% of Gram Panchayats within them qualify, while District Panchayats
have a similar OSR growth condition
The emphasis on Gram Panchayats is appropriate because they are closest to citizens and deliver basic services such
as sanitation, water management, local roads, village infrastructure and community assets. The requirement of Gram
Sabha resolutions for activities under tied and untied grants also strengthens local democracy
However, the OSR benchmark may be difficult for poorer Panchayats, especially in backward, tribal, hilly or drought-
prone areas where the tax base is weak. Rural local bodies need capacity building, digitised accounting, trained staff
and predictable State support. Without this, performance-linked grants may reward already better-administered
Panchayats and penalise weaker ones.
Tied and untied grants: flexibility with accountability
The 16th FC recommends that 50% of the basic component be tied to sanitation, solid waste management and/or
water management. The remaining 50% of basic grants and the entire performance component are untied, subject to
conditions. It also states that not more than 20% of untied allocation should be spent on roads and that untied funds
should not be used for salaries or establishment expenditure
This is a balanced design. Tied grants protect national priorities like sanitation and water, while untied grants allow
local bodies to address local needs. The risk is that excessive conditionality and delayed releases may reduce
autonomy in practice.
Disaster management recommendations
The corpus is divided 80:20 between SDRF and SDMF, strengthening both response and mitigation
Framework must move further from relief-based spending to resilience-based planning, especially for cities, coastal
States, Himalayan States and drought-prone regions.
Fiscal discipline, subsidies, power and public enterprises
States’ fiscal deficit be capped at 3% of GSDP, excluding loans under the Special Assistance to States for Capital
Investment. It also recommends discontinuing off-budget borrowings and bringing such liabilities onto the budget.
On subsidies, the Commission recommends that States review and rationalise subsidy expenditure, set exclusion
criteria, avoid large untargeted unconditional transfers and discontinue financing subsidies through off-budget
borrowings.
On power, it recommends that States actively pursue DISCOM privatisation or serious governance reforms. On State
Public Sector Enterprises, it recommends review, closure of inactive SPSEs and a State-level disinvestment policy.
courses.atishmathur.com 	tracker.atishmathur.com 	upscpath.com
MCN 2.0
 	Magna Carta Mains 2026
Mains Concise Note (MCN) 21 : 16th FC Review : Centre, State, Local

-- 12 of 30 --

Way forward
1. Reform cesses and surcharges through a federal compact
The Centre and States should operationalise the Commission’s “grand bargain”. A practical route could be: sunset
clauses for cesses, annual disclosure of cess utilisation, periodic GST Council/Inter-State Council review, and gradual
conversion of recurring cesses into shareable regular taxes.
2. Introduce targeted equalisation grants
The complete removal of revenue deficit grants should be revisited for genuine structural disabilities. Article 275
grants can be designed for minimum standards in health, education, nutrition, climate adaptation and disaster-prone
regions.
3. Improve the horizontal formula
Future Commissions may use a composite “fiscal capacity and service need index” rather than relying heavily on
income distance alone. Tax effort, quality of expenditure, learning outcomes, health outcomes and climate
vulnerability can be better integrated.
4. Strengthen State Finance Commissions
SFCs should have permanent secretariats, common methodology templates, mandatory timelines, public databases,
legislative debate on Action Taken Reports and alignment with State budgets.
5. Build municipal finance capacity
ULBs need GIS-based property tax systems, user charge reform with lifeline exemptions for the poor, municipal
cadres, project preparation facilities, transparent procurement and audited accounts. Grants should be combined with
capacity-building funds.
6. Make urbanisation premium planning-led
Before claiming urbanisation premium, States should prepare rural-urban transition policies, metropolitan plans, ward
integration plans, staffing plans and service-level baselines. Municipalisation should be tied to real governance
capacity.
7. Support weaker Panchayats
For RLBs, OSR conditions should be accompanied by training, digital accounting, Panchayat-level revenue mapping,
social audit, Gram Sabha planning and support for maintenance of local assets.
8. Make subsidies transparent, targeted and time-bound
All major subsidies and cash transfers should have fiscal impact statements, beneficiary databases, exclusion criteria,
sunset clauses and independent evaluation. Welfare should continue, but off-budget and opaque financing must end.
9. Link disaster finance to climate resilience
Disaster funds should increasingly support mitigation: urban flood control, heat action plans, cyclone shelters,
resilient health infrastructure, watershed restoration and early warning systems.
10. Create a continuing Fiscal Federalism Council
A permanent consultative forum involving the Union, States, Finance Commission, GST Council representatives and
SFC representatives can review cesses, CSS design, local body devolution, borrowing limits and fiscal risks annually.
The way forward is not merely more money, but a more transparent, predictable and genuinely federal fiscal
architecture.
courses.atishmathur.com 	tracker.atishmathur.com 	upscpath.com
MCN 2.0
 	Magna Carta Mains 2026
Mains Concise Note (MCN) 21 : 16th FC Review : Centre, State, Local

-- 13 of 30 --

Despite same party governments, the Mahandi river dispute continues to be pending in the Tribunal since
2018
Intro
Water federalism refers to the division and coordination of powers and responsibilities between the central
and state governments for water governance in a federal system like Indi
Constitutional and Legal Provisions Concerning Inter-State Water Disputes
Constitutional Provisions
Article 246 & Seventh Schedule:
Entry 17, State List: Water supplies, irrigation, and canals are primarily state subjects.
Entry 56, Union List: The Centre has the power to regulate and develop inter-state rivers and river valleys if
Parliament declares it expedient in the public interest.
Article 262:
(1) Parliament may by law provide for the adjudication of any dispute or complaint with respect to the use,
distribution, or control of the waters of, or in, any inter-state river or river valley.
(2) Parliament may by law provide that neither the Supreme Court nor any other court shall exercise jurisdiction in
respect of any such dispute or complaint.
Key Legislation
Inter-State River Water Disputes Act, 1956 (ISRWDA):
Provides for the adjudication of disputes relating to waters of inter-state rivers and river valleys by setting up
tribunals.
Bars the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court and other courts in such matters.
River Boards Act, 1956:
Intended to provide for the establishment of river boards for the regulation and development of inter-state rivers and
river valleys. However, this Act has never been effectively used.
Other Relevant Provisions
Article 252: Parliament can legislate on a State subject if two or more States consent.
Article 253: Parliament can legislate to implement international treaties, which can include water agreements with
neighbouring countries.
Environment (Protection) Act, 1986; Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974: Used for broader
environmental regulation, including water quality, often leveraging concurrent or union powers
Tribunal Name 	States Involved 	Date of Constitution 	Status/Outcome
Godavari Water
Disputes Tribunal
Maharashtra, Andhra
Pradesh, Karnataka,
Apr 1, 1969 	Decision in July 1980
Krishna Water Disputes
Tribunal-I
Maharashtra, Andhra
Pradesh, Karnataka
Apr 1, 1969 	Decision in May 1976
Narmada Water
Disputes Tribunal
Rajasthan, MP, Gujarat,
Maharashtra
Oct 1, 1969 	Decision in December
1979; Narmada Control
Ravi & Beas Water
Tribunal
Punjab, Haryana,
Rajasthan
Apr 1, 1986 	Decision in April 1987;
further report pending
Cauvery Water
Disputes Tribunal
Kerala, Karnataka,
Tamil Nadu,
Jun 1, 1990 	Decision in 2007;
Supreme Court
Krishna Water Disputes
Tribunal-II
Karnataka, Andhra
Pradesh, Maharashtra,
Apr 1, 2004 	Decision in December
2010; further
Vansadhara Water
Disputes Tribunal
Andhra Pradesh,
Odisha
Feb 1, 2010 	Decision in September
2017; further report
Mahadayi Water
Disputes Tribunal
Goa, Karnataka,
Maharashtra
Nov 1, 2010 	Decision in August
2018; further report
Mahanadi Water
Disputes Tribunal
Chhattisgarh, Odisha 	Mar 1, 2018 	Under adjudication
courses.atishmathur.com 	tracker.atishmathur.com 	upscpath.com
MCN 2.0
 	Magna Carta Mains 2026
Mains Concise Note (MCN) 22 : Water Federalism

-- 14 of 30 --

Issues?
1.Structural and Legal Ambiguities
a.Federal-Jurisdictional Ambiguity: The division of powers between Centre and States is imprecise, leading to confusion and
contestation over roles and responsibilities1.
b.Historico-Geographical Ambiguity: State boundaries have changed over time, but water-sharing agreements often rely on
outdated arrangements, fuelling disputes.
c.Institutional Ambiguity: The roles of tribunals and the Supreme Court overlap, causing delays and uncertainty in dispute
resolution.
2.Operational and Political Challenges
a.Delays and Inefficiency: Tribunals often take decades to deliver decisions, and implementation is further delayed by political and
bureaucratic hurdles.
b.Non-Compliance: States sometimes refuse to comply with tribunal or court decisions, citing political or electoral pressures.
c.Data Deficits: Lack of credible, shared data on water flows and usage undermines trust and effective decision-making.
d.Fragmented Approach: Water governance is often reductionist, focusing on engineering solutions rather than integrated,
ecological management.
e.Political Mobilisation: Water disputes are politicized, becoming tools for regional identity and electoral mobilisation, which
hinders compromise and consensus-building.
3.Technical and Ecological Issues
a.Supply Augmentation Bias: Over-reliance on large dams and supply-side interventions, neglecting demand management,
efficiency, and ecosystem health.
b.Climate Change: Increasing variability and extremes exacerbate existing disputes and challenge old allocation models.
Best Practices Globally
1.Integrated River Basin Management (IRBM): Adopted in the EU (Water Framework Directive), Australia (Murray-Darling Basin), and
other countries, IRBM emphasises managing water at the basin level, integrating ecological, social, and economic objectives.
2.Basin Authorities: Bodies like the Murray-Darling Basin Authority (Australia) and LAWA (Germany) facilitate coordination, data
sharing, and consensus-building among stakeholders.
3.Water Markets: Australia and Chile have established water markets to allow flexible, efficient allocation of water, especially during
scarcity.
4.Credible Data Institutions: The US Geological Survey (USGS) provides transparent, reliable water data, supporting consensus and
adaptive management.
Solutions
1.Institutional and Legal Reforms
a.Build Federal Consensus: Elevate water security as a national agenda, with clear, shared roles for Centre and States, and
empower platforms like the Interstate Council for deliberation and consensus-building1.
b.Redefine Centre’s Role: Expand and clarify the Centre’s powers under Entry 56 to facilitate partnerships and support state
regulatory frameworks, rather than act only as an adjudicator.
c.Establish Robust Basin Authorities: Move toward integrated river basin organisations with genuine participation from all
stakeholders and clear mandates for ecological, economic, and social outcomes.
d.Strengthen Data Systems: Invest in autonomous, credible institutions for data gathering and knowledge production, with
transparent protocols and stakeholder buy-in.
2.Policy and Fiscal Innovations
a.Design Better Fiscal Transfers: Make intergovernmental fiscal transfers (IGFTs) performance-based, flexible, and tailored to
state-specific challenges, incentivising progressive reforms and sustainable practices.
b.Promote Demand Management: Shift focus from supply augmentation (dams, diversions) to demand management, efficiency,
and ecosystem restoration.
c.Resolve Contradictory Policies: Align water, agriculture, and energy policies (e.g., MSP, electricity subsidies) to break perverse
incentives that drive overuse and conflict.
3.Participatory and Multidisciplinary Approaches
a.Inclusive Governance: Ensure representation of diverse expertise (social, ecological, economic) in decision-making bodies.
b.Stakeholder Engagement: Foster public participation, transparency, and accountability at all levels of water governance.
c.Learning from Successes: Study and adapt lessons from successful models in other sectors (e.g., RKVY in agriculture, PMGSY in
rural roads) and countries.
4.Political and Social Measures
a.Depoliticise Disputes: Encourage positive politicisation—public discourse focused on resolution and consensus, not identity-
based mobilisation.
b.Build Trust: Invest in confidence-building measures, both institutionally and electorally, to support durable agreements.
courses.atishmathur.com 	tracker.atishmathur.com 	upscpath.com
MCN 2.0
 	Magna Carta Mains 2026
Mains Concise Note (MCN) 22 : Water Federalism

-- 15 of 30 --

SC set timelines for Governor Assent in State of TN v Bn Ravi in 2025 followed by a request for
Presidential Reference which reversed the timelines set.
Intro
Enshrined under Articles 153 to 167 of the Indian Constitution, the office of the Governor symbolises the link
between the Centre and the States in India’s quasi-federal structure
Supreme Court Timelines on Governor's Assent
Background: There has been growing concern over delays by
Governors in granting assent to Bills passed by state legislatures,
sometimes leading to legislative paralysis
Supreme Court Ruling (April 2025): The Supreme Court set explicit
timelines for Governors to act on Bills under Article 200:
One month to grant or withhold assent.
Three months if the Bill is reserved for the President’s
consideration.
One month to act on Bills returned for reconsideration
President’s Role: For the first time, the Court also directed that the
President must decide on Bills referred by Governors within three
months
SC reversed its 2025 judgement while delivering a Presidential
Reference later in 2025
Appointment
The Governor is appointed by
the President of India as per
Article 155 of the
Constitution. The
appointment is made by the
central government, usually
on the advice of the Prime
Minister and the Council of
Ministers.
- Central government’s
dominance; lack of
transparency
- Politicization; often used as
a reward for loyalty
- No formal consultation with
state governments
- Sarkaria Commission:
Appointee should be
eminent, from outside the
state, detached from local
politics, and not active in
politics recently.
Consultation with the Chief
Minister recommended.
- Punchhi Commission:
Endorsed Sarkaria, added
fixed tenure and transparent
process; suggested a panel
for selection.
- Rajamannar Committee:
Governor should not act as
Centre’s agent;
recommended more state
say.
Eligibility
The Governor must be a
citizen of India and at least 35
years old as per Article 157 of
the Constitution.
- Minimal constitutional
criteria (only age and
citizenship)
- No bar on recent politicians
or persons with conflicts of
interest
- Sarkaria & Punchhi
Commissions: Eminent
persons only; should not be
active politicians or involved
in state politics.
- Conventions: Preferably
from outside the state; not
holding office of profit.
Aspect 	Description 	Issues 	Solution
courses.atishmathur.com 	tracker.atishmathur.com 	upscpath.com
MCN 2.0
 	Magna Carta Mains 2026
Mains Concise Note (MCN) 23 : Governor

-- 16 of 30 --

Removal
The Governor holds office
at the pleasure of the
President as per Article
156(1). There is no fixed
term for removal, and it
can be done without
specifying reasons.
- Arbitrary removal at the
pleasure of the President
- No fixed grounds or
process; leads to
politicisation and
instability
- Supreme Court (B.P.
Singhal, 2010): Removal
cannot be arbitrary, must
be for valid and
compelling reasons.
- Punchhi Commission:
Removal should follow an
impartial process,
possibly similar to
presidential
impeachment.
- Rajamannar Committee:
Removal should not be at
Centre’s whim; suggested
state legislature
involvement.
Discretionary Powers
These are powers
exercised by the Governor
according to their own
discretion, without the
advice of the Council of
Ministers. Examples
include appointing a Chief
Minister in a hung
assembly, reserving bills
for the President’s assent,
and recommending
President’s Rule under
Article 356.
- Vague scope; potential
for misuse in hung
assemblies, bill assent,
and recommending
President’s Rule
- Frequent political
controversies
- Sarkaria Commission:
Discretion to be used
sparingly, within
constitutional
conventions;
recommended judicial
review to check misuse.
- Punchhi Commission:
Discretionary powers to
be limited, guided by
reason and good faith;
recommended timelines
for bill assent (six
months).
- 2nd Administrative
Reforms Commission:
Guidelines for exercise of
discretion by Inter-State
Council.
Arguments For Retaining:
1.Acts as a constitutional check and upholds the federal
structure.
2.Provides stability in times of political crisis, such as hung
assemblies or constitutional breakdowns.
3.Ensures that the state government acts within the
framework of the Constitution.
4.Facilitates communication and coordination between
the Centre and states, especially in matters of national
importance.
Should We Even Have the Office of the Governor?
Arguments Against/For Reform:
1.The office is often misused for political purposes,
undermining state autonomy.
2.Delays in assent to Bills and discretionary interventions
have led to legislative deadlocks.
3.Several committees (Rajamannar, Sarkaria, Punchhi) have
recommended reforms to limit central interference and
make the office more impartial and accountable.
4.Most expert bodies have not recommended abolition but
advocate for reforms: fixed tenure, clear eligibility,
transparent removal, and limiting discretionary powers.
The Governor was meant to be a sentinel of the Constitution, not a shadow of the Centre. When discretion turns into disruption,
the balance of federalism falters. Restoring dignity to this office is not just a legal need—it is a democratic imperative.
courses.atishmathur.com 	tracker.atishmathur.com 	upscpath.com
MCN 2.0
 	Magna Carta Mains 2026
Mains Concise Note (MCN) 23 : Governor

-- 17 of 30 --

MCN 2.0
 	Magna Carta Mains 2026
Mains Concise Note (MCN) 23 : Governor
Governor’s Address to the State Legislature: Articles 175 and 176
Core issue
The controversy arises when Governors either skip the annual address, refuse to read the cabinet-approved
text, omit portions, or convert the address into a personal/political statement. This is especially contentious in
Opposition-ruled States because the Governor is a Union-appointed constitutional head, while the address
reflects the elected State government’s policy agenda.
Constitutional position
Article 175 gives the Governor a general right to address either House or both Houses and send messages to
the House. Article 176 is different: it creates a mandatory special address at the commencement of the first
session after every general election and at the first session of every year. The Constitution uses “shall” in
Article 176, making it a constitutional duty, not a matter of personal choice.
The Governor is not an independent political authority in ordinary legislative-executive matters. Article 163
makes the Governor act on the aid and advice of the Council of Ministers except where the Constitution
specifically permits discretion, and Article 159 requires the Governor to preserve, protect and defend the
Constitution.
The Supreme Court in Shamsher Singh v. State of Punjab held that the President and Governor exercise
constitutional powers on ministerial aid and advice, except in constitutionally specified discretionary areas.
Why the Governor cannot rewrite the address
The address is constitutionally delivered by the Governor but politically belongs to the elected Council of
Ministers. The Governor’s role is similar to that of a constitutional reader of the government’s policy statement,
not an editor of the State’s political programme. In Nabam Rebia v. Deputy Speaker, the Supreme Court noted
that unlike Section 63 of the Government of India Act, 1935, Article 175 does not retain the phrase “in his
discretion”; therefore, messages under Article 175 must be in consonance with ministerial aid and advice.
This logic applies even more strongly to Article 176 because the annual address is meant to inform the
Legislature of the causes of summons and enable a Motion of Thanks/debate on the government’s policies. If
the Governor omits portions critical of the Union or inserts his own formulation, it distorts responsible
government and shifts accountability away from the elected cabinet.
Current controversies
Recent controversies in Kerala and Karnataka show a pattern: Governors objecting to portions of policy
addresses, omitting paragraphs, or refusing to deliver the full speech. In Kerala, reports stated that the
Governor omitted portions and later sought that only the read-out portions be treated as official record, while
the Chief Minister maintained that the full cabinet-approved text forms the address. In Karnataka, reports
stated that the Governor objected to paragraphs in the government-prepared address, including parts
concerning Union-State fiscal issues, and declined or curtailed the customary address.
Democratic and federal concerns
This practice raises four concerns: first, it weakens collective responsibility because the Assembly debates a
speech that may no longer reflect the elected government’s programme; second, it allows the Governor to
become a political participant; third, it undermines State autonomy by screening policy criticism of the Union;
and fourth, it creates avoidable constitutional confrontation at the very opening of the legislative year.
The Supreme Court in Nabam Rebia warned that the Governor cannot assume roles not constitutionally
assigned to him and cannot act as a “conscience keeper” or marshal of the Assembly’s functioning. Any
interjection by the Governor into legislative functioning beyond the Constitution is liable to judicial review.
Way forward
The address should be treated as the cabinet’s speech delivered through the Governor. If the Governor has
concerns about factual errors, constitutionally impermissible content, or defamatory material, the proper
course is prior consultation with the Chief Minister, not unilateral deletion on the floor of the House. The full
cabinet-approved text should be laid on the table and treated as the official record where the Governor omits
parts. State Rules of Procedure may be clarified to this effect.
A constitutional convention should be codified: the Governor must read the cabinet-approved address;
objections, if any, must be recorded before the session; and refusal to deliver the address should be treated as
a serious breach of constitutional duty. This would protect both the dignity of the Governor and the supremacy
of the elected legislature.
courses.atishmathur.com 	tracker.atishmathur.com 	upscpath.com
Specific Issues

-- 18 of 30 --

Governor’s Role in Government Formation in a Hung Assembly
Core issue
The Governor’s discretion becomes most sensitive when no party has a clear majority. The constitutional danger is that the
Governor may prefer a politically convenient claimant rather than the person most likely to command the confidence of the House.
Constitutional basis
Article 164(1) says the Chief Minister is appointed by the Governor, while other Ministers are appointed on the Chief Minister’s
advice. Article 164(2) makes the Council of Ministers collectively responsible to the Legislative Assembly. Thus, the Governor’s
discretion in a hung Assembly is not personal or ideological; it is only a temporary constitutional mechanism to identify who can
face the House.
The Constitution does not lay down a detailed order of preference for hung Assemblies. Therefore, conventions, commission
reports and judicial decisions fill the gap.
Sarkaria and Punchhi Commission principles
The Sarkaria Commission’s central principle was that the Governor should call the party or combination commanding the widest
support in the Assembly, and that the Governor’s task is to ensure government formation, not to install a government whose
policies he approves.
Where no party has a clear majority, the recommended order is: first, a pre-poll alliance; second, the largest single party staking
claim with support of others; third, a post-electoral coalition where all partners join government; and fourth, a post-electoral
alliance where some parties join government and others support from outside. The Punchhi Commission substantially reaffirmed
this order and recommended that these guidelines be treated as constitutional conventions.
Floor test as the decisive test
The Governor may examine letters of support and rival claims only as a prima facie exercise. The final test is not Raj Bhavan
arithmetic but the floor of the House. In S.R. Bommai v. Union of India, the Supreme Court held that the proper forum to test
majority support is the Legislative Assembly not by the Governor herself.
In Rameshwar Prasad v. Union of India, the Court struck down the dissolution of the Bihar Assembly where the Governor’s report
relied on fears of horse-trading before allowing a government to be formed. The Court held that private assessment of majority,
when a floor test is possible, is anathema to democratic principle.
Key concerns
Misuse of discretion. Examples such as Goa, Manipur, Karnataka and Maharashtra show that different Governors have applied
different yardsticks: sometimes inviting the single largest party, sometimes inviting a post-poll coalition, and sometimes giving long
or short periods for proving majority. This inconsistency creates the impression that the office is acting politically rather than
constitutionally.
Timing. A very long period to prove majority may encourage horse-trading; an unreasonably short period may prevent genuine
coalition building. The Sarkaria/Punchhi approach is that the Chief Minister should ordinarily prove majority within a reasonable
time, generally within 30 days, unless urgent circumstances require a shorter period.
Way forward
India needs a codified constitutional convention, preferably through rules framed by State legislatures or a constitutional
amendment, laying down the order of invitation, time frame for floor test, and the obligation to record reasons. The Governor
should invite the claimant most likely to command majority, appoint a pro-tem Speaker where necessary, ensure oath of MLAs, and
require a floor test at the earliest reasonable date. The Governor must not assess the morality of alliances; that is for voters,
parties, the Speaker under the Tenth Schedule, and courts where applicable.
Governor Demanding Signed Letters, Delaying Oath, and Fixing Confidence Vote: The Tamil Nadu-type Issue
Core issue
Can a Governor refuse to invite the single largest party or claimant unless it first produces signed letters from an absolute majority
of MLAs? Can the Governor delay the oath and insist on proof before swearing-in? Can he direct a confidence vote within a fixed
deadline?
Correct constitutional test
The Governor’s duty after an election is to identify the person most likely to command confidence, not to conduct a parallel floor
test in Raj Bhavan. The Governor may seek support letters, coalition letters, or party-authorisation letters as preliminary evidence.
But he cannot insist that all supporting MLAs personally submit signatures as a precondition to the oath when the correct forum
for proving majority is the Assembly.
Why a demand for absolute majority before oath is problematic
The Constitution does not say that a Chief Minister-designate must prove an absolute majority before being sworn in. In
parliamentary practice, minority governments are possible so long as they enjoy the confidence of the House. S.R. Bommai and
Rameshwar Prasad both recognise that what matters is confidence of the House, not necessarily a pre-existing numerical majority
outside the House.
Further, Article 189 provides that questions in the House are decided by a majority of members present and voting, unless the
Constitution provides otherwise. Requiring signatures from 50%+1 of the full House before oath converts a parliamentary
confidence test into a presidential-style precondition.
In Rameshwar Prasad, the Supreme Court stated that issues of floor-crossing are for the Speaker during/after the floor test, and
broader political impropriety is for the electorate and public scrutiny.
Practical constitutional formula
The Governor should follow this sequence: invite the claimant according to the Sarkaria-Punchhi order; require a written claim of
support, but not a pre-oath parade or compulsory signatures of every supporter; swear in the Chief Minister; summon the House
at the earliest reasonable date; ensure MLAs take oath; and let majority be tested through a confidence motion on the floor. In
Subhash Desai v. Principal Secretary, Governor of Maharashtra, the Supreme Court held that the Governor’s discretion to call a
floor test is not unfettered
The guiding principle is simple: Raj Bhavan may identify the claimant, but the Assembly alone certifies the majority.
courses.atishmathur.com 	tracker.atishmathur.com 	upscpath.com
MCN 2.0
 	Magna Carta Mains 2026
Mains Concise Note (MCN) 23 : Governor

-- 19 of 30 --

NITI Aayog, established in 2015 to replace the erstwhile Planning Commission, represents a paradigm shift
in India’s approach to economic governance—from top-down planning to cooperative and competitive
federalism.
Intro
Rationale for Establishment
1.Shift from Centralised to Decentralised Planning: The Planning Commission’s top-down approach was seen as
outdated for India’s diverse and rapidly changing needs. NITI Aayog was designed to foster a bottom-up approach,
emphasising local-level planning and state participation.
2.Cooperative Federalism: NITI Aayog aims to strengthen Centre-State partnerships, encouraging states to play an
active role in national development strategies.
3.Focus on Innovation and Knowledge: The institution serves as a think tank, promoting innovation, entrepreneurship,
and evidence-based policy-making by leveraging expertise from various sectors.
4. Inclusive and Sustainable Development: Special attention is given to vulnerable sections of society, ensuring that
growth is equitable and sustainable.
A. Policy Initiatives
* Aspirational Districts Programme: Targets rapid transformation of underdeveloped districts through convergence, collaboration,
and competition among states. It has led to improvements in health, education, agriculture, and basic infrastructure in several
districts.
* Atal Innovation Mission (AIM): Fosters a culture of innovation and entrepreneurship through Atal Tinkering Labs in schools and Atal
Incubation Centres for startups, boosting India’s innovation ecosystem.
* Strategy for New India @75: A comprehensive roadmap for India’s development across 41 sectors, formulated through extensive
stakeholder consultations.
Impact: Examples and Case Studies
Sector 	Initiative/Case Study 	Outcome/Impact
Agriculture 	Mazhapolima (Kerala)
Rainwater harvesting for well recharge,
addressing water scarcity through
community participation.
Financial Inclusion 	Panchayat Banks (Jharkhand)
Village-level banking, improved access to
government schemes, reduced leakages, and
increased transparency.
Health 	Arogyakeralam (Kerala)
Community-based palliative care, home visits
by teams, holistic support for chronically ill
patients.
Governance Entitlement-Based District Planning
(Bihar)
Decentralized planning for accuracy and
equity, institutionalizing district-level
strategies.
Nutrition Decentralized ICDS Supplementary
Nutrition (Odisha)
Empowered women SHGs, improved nutrition
delivery, enhanced social sustainability
through community-driven models.
Technology 	SMART Anganwadi (Gujarat)
Mobile app for real-time monitoring of child
health and nutrition, streamlined service
delivery.
courses.atishmathur.com 	tracker.atishmathur.com 	upscpath.com
MCN 2.0
 	Magna Carta Mains 2026
Mains Concise Note (MCN) 24 : Niti Aayog

-- 20 of 30 --

Challenges
1.Limited Financial Powers: Unlike the Planning Commission, NITI Aayog does not allocate funds,
which limits its influence over implementation.
2.Coordination Issues: India’s federal structure can hamper effective coordination between Centre
and States, affecting policy execution.
3.Data Limitations: Inadequate and unreliable data at various administrative levels hinder evidence-
based policymaking and monitoring.
4.State Participation: Variability in state cooperation, with some states boycotting meetings or not
fully engaging with NITI Aayog’s initiatives.
5.Perceived Partisanship: Accusations of political bias and lack of autonomy have sometimes
undermined its credibility.
6.Methodological Concerns: Criticisms regarding the accuracy and applicability of indices and
rankings published by NITI Aayog.
7.Limited Public Accountability: The institution’s advisory role and lack of clear accountability
mechanisms reduce its ability to drive change.
Solutions
1.Empower with Financial and Legal Authority: Granting NITI Aayog greater financial and statutory
powers could strengthen its role in policy implementation and accountability.
2.Strengthen Data Infrastructure: Invest in robust, real-time data systems for better policy design,
monitoring, and evaluation.
3.Institutionalise Stakeholder Engagement: Build formal frameworks for regular consultation with
states, civil society, and the private sector to ensure buy-in and effective implementation.
4.Promote Non-Partisan Functioning: Safeguard NITI Aayog’s independence to ensure unbiased
policy advice and foster trust among all stakeholders.
5.Capacity Building at State and Local Levels: Support states and local bodies with resources and
training to effectively implement policies and programs.
6.Transparent Monitoring and Reporting: Enhance transparency through open data initiatives,
regular progress reports, and public dissemination of outcomes.
7.Innovate for Inclusion: Continue to pilot and scale up innovative models, especially those that
empower marginalised groups and address regional disparities.
NITI Aayog was born to give shape to India’s aspirations, not just its allocations. Yet, without financial autonomy or
legislative teeth, it risks becoming a vision without velocity. For it to truly steer India’s development story, it must
evolve from being a think tank to a do tank—grounded in innovation, empowered by federal trust, and driven by
measurable impact.
courses.atishmathur.com 	tracker.atishmathur.com 	upscpath.com
MCN 2.0
 	Magna Carta Mains 2026
Mains Concise Note (MCN) 24 : Niti Aayog

-- 21 of 30 --

The Goods and Services Tax (GST), implemented in 2017, marked India’s boldest step towards “one nation,
one tax, one market.
Intro
The 19th report of Parliament’s Public Accounts Committee (PAC) is appropriately scathing in its criticism of the
Goods and Services Tax (GST) regime, introduced in July 2017 to simplify, unify and improve indirect tax
compliance in India
Key Changes in GST Rates (Effective Sept
22, 2025)
5% Slab (Essentials): Applies to
common household goods, packed
food, clothing, shoes, and
pharmaceutical products.
18% Slab (Standard): The new
standard rate for most consumer
goods, services, and electronics,
replacing the old 28% rate
40% Slab (Luxury/Sin): Applies to
luxury cars, high-end motorcycles,
pan masala, tobacco, and aerated
drinks.
Exemptions: Health and life
insurance premiums are now exempt
from GST
Advantages
1.Creation of a Common National Market: By
unifying multiple taxes, GST has facilitated the
creation of a single market across India, improving
the ease of doing business and interstate
commerce.
2.Reduction in Tax Burden: The elimination of
cascading taxes and input tax credit mechanism
has generally reduced the overall tax burden on
goods, making Indian products more competitive.
3.Increased Tax Base and Compliance: The digital-
first approach and centralised reporting have
broadened the tax base and improved compliance,
bringing more businesses into the formal economy.
4.Transparent and Self-Policing: GST’s structure and
digital tracking make tax evasion more difficult and
administration more efficient.
5.Boost to the Economy: GST has streamlined
supply chains, reduced logistics costs, and
potentially boosted consumer spending by
lowering prices for many goods and services.
6.Revenue Implications: The broadening of the tax
base and improved compliance are expected to
increase government revenues, though the actual
impact depends on economic conditions and
ongoing compliance.
1.Technological and Compliance Hurdles: The transition to
a fully digital system has posed challenges, especially for
small and medium enterprises (SMEs) with limited digital
literacy and resources
2.Revenue Decline: The PAC highlights a nearly two
percentage points drop in indirect tax revenue between
FY18 and FY20, before the COVID-19 pandemic.
3.Complexity: Despite intentions to simplify, frequent rate
changes, multiple return filings, and evolving rules have
made compliance burdensome for many businesses,
particularly SMEs
4.Centralising Tendencies: Major revenue-generating States
have raised concerns about diminished fiscal autonomy
and sharp declines in indirect tax collections. The
destination-based nature of GST, levied at the point of
consumption, has adversely affected manufacturing-heavy
States.
5.Compensation Delays: The GST (Compensation to States)
Act, 2017, promised States a 14% annual revenue growth
for five years (2017–22), using FY16 as the base year.
However, many States have reported non-receipt or
serious delays in compensation, negatively impacting
governance.
6.Exclusions: Certain items such as alcohol for human
consumption and select petroleum products remain
outside the GST ambit, limiting its comprehensiveness
Issues
GST was envisioned as a unifying force for India’s fragmented tax landscape—but unity without equity breeds
friction. As States struggle with revenue loss and compliance burdens persist, the real test of GST lies not in its
design, but in its delivery. For GST to truly succeed, it must balance efficiency with empathy, and harmonisation with
federal trust.
courses.atishmathur.com 	tracker.atishmathur.com 	upscpath.com
MCN 2.0
 	Magna Carta Mains 2026
Mains Concise Note (MCN) 25 : GST
Next Gen GST

-- 22 of 30 --

Aspect 	Cooperative Federalism 	Competitive Federalism Confrontational
Federalism
Definition
Flexible, collaborative
relationship between
central and state
governments to achieve
common goals.
System where central and
state governments, and
states among themselves,
compete for resources,
investments, and reforms.
Tense or adversarial
relationship, often due to
the central government
overstepping into state
domains.
Nature of Relationship
Horizontal partnership;
joint decision-making and
shared responsibilities.
Both vertical (Centre vs.
State) and horizontal (State
vs. State) competition;
rivalry for development
and resources.
Often vertical; central
dominance leads to
disputes, mistrust, or state
resistance.
Key Features
- Joint policy formulation
- Shared funding and
implementation
- Mutual trust.
- States compete for
central funds, investments,
and rankings
- Policy innovation
- Fiscal discipline.
- Central encroachment on
state powers
- Use of governors for
political ends
- Policy imposition.
Constitutional Basis
Not explicitly stated;
implied through
mechanisms like Inter-
State Council, GST Council,
NITI Aayog.
Based on decentralisation,
fiscal federalism, and post-
liberalisation reforms.
Emerges from disputes
over constitutional
boundaries, central
overreach, or misuse of
concurrent powers.
Decision-Making
Consensus-based,
consultative; Centre and
states act as partners.
States independently
design and implement
policies to outperform
others.
Centre often unilaterally
imposes decisions, leading
to state opposition.
Examples
- GST Council formation
- NITI Aayog
- Disaster management
(COVID-19 response)
- Ayushman Bharat.
- Ease of Doing Business
rankings
- Vibrant Gujarat Summit
- States’ own welfare
schemes (e.g., KALIA, Rythu
Bandhu)
- Attracting FDI.
- Revocation of Article 370
(J&K)
- Central farm laws
- Governor’s role in Tamil
Nadu
- GST compensation
disputes.
Benefits
- Balanced regional
development
- Resource sharing
- Reduces regional
disparities.
- Policy innovation
- Economic efficiency
- Improved public service
quality
- Healthy competition.
- Can highlight state rights
issues
- May lead to judicial
clarification of powers.
Challenges
- Coordination difficulties
- Potential for delays
- Power imbalances.
- Regional inequalities
- “Race to the bottom” risk
- Weaker states may lag.
- Erodes trust
- Hampers governance
- Can trigger constitutional
crises.
courses.atishmathur.com 	tracker.atishmathur.com 	upscpath.com
MCN 2.0
 	Magna Carta Mains 2026
Mains Concise Note (MCN) 26 : Models of Federalism

-- 23 of 30 --

Feature of India’s Unitary Model Constitutional Basis /
Provision Example
Strong Centre Union List, Articles 245–
246, Seventh Schedule
Defence policy, foreign relations and currency are controlled exclusively by
the Union.
Residuary powers with Centre Article 248; Entry 97,
Union List
Cyber laws, digital taxation and new technology regulation can be legislated
by Parliament.
Single Constitution 	Constitution of India All States function under the same Constitution, except special historical
arrangements earlier given to J&K before 2019.
Single citizenship 	Articles 5–11 A person from Kerala has the same Indian citizenship rights in Maharashtra
or Delhi.
Parliament can alter State boundaries 	Article 3 	Creation of Telangana in 2014; reorganisation of Jammu & Kashmir in 2019.
Emergency provisions 	Articles 352, 356, 360 During National Emergency, Parliament can legislate on State subjects;
under President’s Rule, State executive power is taken over by the Union.
President’s Rule 	Article 356 President’s Rule has been imposed in States such as Punjab, Kerala,
Uttarakhand and Arunachal Pradesh at different times.
Governor as Centre’s nominee 	Articles 153–161 	Governors may reserve State Bills for the President’s consideration.
All India Services 	Article 312 District Collectors and Superintendents of Police are State-level officers but
belong to All India Services.
Parliament can legislate on State subjects
in national interest Article 249 Parliament can legislate on matters like public order or agriculture if
declared necessary in national interest.
Parliament can legislate on State subjects
during Emergency Article 250 	During Emergency, Centre’s legislative authority expands over States.
Parliament can legislate on State subjects
if States consent Article 252 	Water pollution control legislation was enacted through this route.
International obligations override federal
division Article 253 Environmental laws and human rights-related laws can be enacted by
Parliament to fulfil international commitments.
Concurrent List and Union supremacy 	Article 254 Criminal law, education, forests, labour welfare and marriage laws often
show Union influence.
Financial dependence of States 	Articles 268–281 Centrally Sponsored Schemes like PMAY, Jal Jeevan Mission and NHM
require State implementation but Union funding and guidelines.
Cesses and surcharges outside divisible
pool Articles 270–271 Education cess, health cess and other surcharges reduce the shareable tax
pool.
Integrated election machinery 	Article 324 State Assembly elections are conducted under the supervision of the
Election Commission of India.
Comptroller and Auditor General 	Articles 148–151 CAG audits State government expenditure and places reports before State
Legislatures.
Integrated constitutional bodies
UPSC, Finance
Commission, Election
Commission, CAG
UPSC conducts recruitment for All India Services; Finance Commission
recommends tax sharing.
Uniform civil and criminal justice structure IPC/BNS, CrPC/BNSS,
Evidence Act/BSA Criminal law reforms passed by Parliament apply across most of India.
Centre’s directions to States 	Articles 256–257 Union can issue directions to States for implementing central laws or
protecting national infrastructure.
GST 	Article 279A 	GST Council recommends rates, exemptions and procedures
courses.atishmathur.com 	tracker.atishmathur.com 	upscpath.com
MCN 2.0
 
Magna Carta Mains 2026 Mains Concise Note (MCN) 26 : Models of Federalism

-- 24 of 30 --

Area 	Cooperative Federalism 	Competitive Federalism 	Combative Federalism
Meaning
Centre and States work
together to solve common
problems.
States compete to attract
investment, improve
governance and rank better.
Centre and States, or States
inter se, enter conflict,
litigation or political
confrontation.
Institutional platforms
NITI Aayog Governing Council
brings Centre and States
together as “Team India”; NITI
itself describes its role as
promoting cooperative
federalism.
NITI Aayog promotes rankings
such as Health Index, SDG
Index, School Education
Quality Index, Water Index,
Innovation Index and Export
Preparedness Index.
Boycott of NITI Aayog
meetings by some States,
alleging inadequate
consultation or fiscal
centralisation.
GST regime
GST Council under Article
279A: Union and States jointly
decide tax rates, exemptions
and procedures; it is often
cited as the best institutional
example of fiscal cooperation.
States compete to increase
GST compliance, improve
revenue mobilisation and
attract GST-paying businesses.
Disputes over GST
compensation, rate
rationalisation and fiscal
autonomy. In Mohit Minerals,
the Supreme Court held that
GST Council recommendations
are persuasive, not binding,
preserving federal autonomy.
Development planning
Centrally Sponsored Schemes
such as Jal Jeevan Mission,
PMAY, SBM, PMGSY and
NHM require Centre-State
cost sharing and
implementation.
States compete in
implementation speed,
beneficiary coverage,
sanitation, housing, health and
infrastructure outcomes.
States often object to fund-
sharing ratios, branding
requirements, conditionalities
and delayed releases.
Aspirational Districts
Programme
Centre, States and district
administrations coordinate to
improve lagging districts.
Delta rankings under the
Champions of Change
dashboard create competition
among districts and States.
Criticism that centrally
designed indicators may ignore
local priorities or increase
administrative pressure on
States.
Ease of doing business
and investment
Centre frames broad reforms;
States implement land, labour,
logistics and single-window
systems.
States compete through
investment summits, industrial
policies, tax incentives and
business reform rankings.
Conflicts arise when States
allege discriminatory allocation
of central projects, special
packages or infrastructure
support.
Public health
COVID-19 management,
vaccination, Ayushman Bharat,
disease surveillance and NHM
show shared responsibility.
States compete through health
indices, hospital infrastructure,
insurance coverage and health
outcomes.
COVID-era disputes over
oxygen allocation, migrant
movement, lockdown powers
and vaccine procurement
showed friction.
Education
NEP 2020 implementation,
Samagra Shiksha and PM-SHRI
require Centre-State
coordination.
School Education Quality
Index and Performance
Grading Index encourage
States to improve outcomes.
Some States resist NEP
provisions, common entrance
frameworks, language policy
or centralisation in higher
education regulation.
MCN 2.0
 	Magna Carta Mains 2026
Mains Concise Note (MCN) 27 : Example Matrix
courses.atishmathur.com 	tracker.atishmathur.com 	upscpath.com

-- 25 of 30 --

Area 	Cooperative Federalism 	Competitive Federalism 	Combative Federalism
Welfare delivery
One Nation One Ration Card,
DBT, Aadhaar-linked welfare
and food security require
Centre-State integration.
States compete through
welfare innovations: Tamil
Nadu’s social welfare model,
Kerala’s social development,
Odisha’s disaster management,
Telangana’s Rythu Bandhu-
type schemes.
Disputes arise over naming,
funding and duplication
between central and State
schemes.
Agriculture
e-NAM, PM-KISAN data
sharing, irrigation schemes and
crop insurance require Centre-
State cooperation.
States compete in
procurement systems, agri-
marketing reforms, irrigation
efficiency, millet promotion
and agri-exports.
The three farm laws, later
repealed, became a major
Centre-State and farmer-
Centre conflict over legislative
competence and consultation.
Environment and
disaster management
Disaster response under
NDMA/SDMA, climate action
plans, CAMPA funds and
pollution-control mechanisms
need joint action.
States compete in renewable
energy capacity, green
investment, EV policies and
climate-resilient infrastructure.
Inter-State river disputes such
as Cauvery, Krishna, Ravi-
Beas/SYL and Mahanadi show
combative federalism between
States.
Governor-State
relations
Ideally, Governors act as
constitutional links between
Union and States.
Not generally a competitive
area.
Delays in assent to State Bills,
floor-test controversies and
reservation of Bills for
President’s consideration
often create conflict.
Delhi and asymmetric
federalism
Article 239AA creates a
special power-sharing model
between the elected Delhi
government, LG and Union.
Delhi competes with
States/UTs in health,
education, transport and
welfare models.
Repeated Delhi Government–
LG–Union disputes over
services and administration.
Central agencies and
law enforcement
Coordination between State
police, CBI, NIA, ED and
central intelligence agencies
can strengthen internal
security.
States compete in policing
reforms, conviction rates,
cybercrime capacity and public
safety indices.
Several States have withdrawn
general consent to CBI or
accused central agencies of
political misuse, reflecting
distrust in Centre-State
relations.
Finance and borrowing
Finance Commission
devolution, grants-in-aid, GST
compensation and disaster
funds are cooperative fiscal
instruments.
States compete for better
fiscal discipline, higher own-
tax revenue, capital
expenditure and investment
ratings.
Disputes over
cesses/surcharges outside
divisible pool, borrowing limits,
GST compensation and
centrally imposed fiscal
conditions.
Language and culture
Eighth Schedule, classical
language recognition, cultural
grants and regional-language
education reflect
accommodation.
States compete to promote
tourism, heritage, language, GI
tags and cultural industries.
Anti-Hindi imposition
movements, language policy
disputes and cultural
autonomy claims
courses.atishmathur.com 	tracker.atishmathur.com 	upscpath.com
MCN 2.0
 	Magna Carta Mains 2026
Mains Concise Note (MCN) 27 : Example Matrix

-- 26 of 30 --

MCN 2.0
 	Magna Carta Mains 2026
Mains Concise Note (MCN) 28 : Ladakh
Ladakh — covering roughly 59,146 sq. km with a sparse population of about 2.74 lakh (2011 Census), comprising
Buddhists, Muslims, and tribal communities — now operates under direct Central administration via a Lieutenant
Governor, with no elected assembly to represent its people.
The two Autonomous Hill Development Councils (LAHDC Leh and LAHDC Kargil), constituted under the Ladakh
Autonomous Hill Development Councils Act, 1997, remain the only elected local bodies, but their powers are limited and
subordinate to the LG.
The Core Demand: Extension of the Sixth Schedule of the Constitution to Ladakh — the same constitutional instrument that
protects tribal areas in Assam, Meghalaya, Tripura, and Mizoram through autonomous district councils with legislative,
executive, and judicial powers.
Articles 244(2) and 275(1) read with the Sixth
Schedule provide for the administration of tribal areas
in four North-Eastern states. Autonomous District
Councils (ADCs) under the Sixth Schedule can:
Make laws on land management, forests (excluding
reserved forests), use of waterways, regulation of
jhum cultivation, and village administration
Establish village courts and try certain civil and
criminal cases under customary law
Levy and collect certain taxes and royalties
Regulate money-lending, trading by non-tribals,
and social customs
Manage primary schools, dispensaries, markets,
and ferries within their areas
This grants a constitutional shield over land,
culture, and identity — far stronger than anything
available under ordinary panchayat law or the
LAHDC Act.
Sixth Schedule
Ladakh's Four Demands
Statehood — Full statehood for Ladakh
with its own Legislature
Sixth Schedule — Constitutional protection
for tribal identity, land, and culture
Recruitment — Separate Public Service
Commission / job reservations for locals
Lok Sabha — Additional parliamentary
representation (currently one MP for the
entire UT)
Why Ladakh is Demanding the Sixth Schedule
1. Loss of the "State Subject" protection. Before 2019, J&K's
Constitution and Article 35A barred outsiders from buying
land or permanently settling. With their abrogation, Ladakhis
fear an unchecked demographic influx and sale of land to non-
locals, threatening tribal land rights.
2. No legislature, no voice. Unlike J&K UT, Ladakh has no
legislative assembly. Every law applicable to Ladakh is made
either by Parliament or through executive orders — with no
elected Ladakhi body having the power to modify or reject it.
3. Ecological fragility. Ladakh's high-altitude ecosystem —
glaciers, pastures, wetlands — is deeply intertwined with tribal
land use. Without constitutional protection, commercial
interests or Central decisions could alter land-use patterns
irreversibly.
4. Cultural and linguistic survival. Indigenous languages
(Ladakhi, Balti, Purgi, Changskhat), Buddhist and Shia religious
customs, and traditional pastoral practices face erosion
without legal protection.
5. Dilution of Hill Council powers. Post-2019, the two Hill
Councils have found their functional autonomy squeezed by
the LG's overarching authority. Funds, functionaries, and
functions remain inadequately transferred.
Challenges to Sixth Schedule Extension
1.Security argument: Strategic border territory;
Centre wary of limiting its administrative
flexibility in a live conflict zone
2.Precedent concern: Could encourage similar
demands from other strategic UTs (e.g.,
Andaman & Nicobar)
3.Intra-Ladakh divide: Kargil (predominantly
Muslim) and Leh (predominantly Buddhist) have
occasionally differed on the nature of
protection sought
4.Sixth Schedule's NE origin: The Schedule was
designed specifically for the North-East;
extending it to a non-NE UT requires
constitutional amendment — a higher bar than
simple legislation
5.Scope ambiguity: Defining which powers would
vest in an ADC vs. the LG vs. Parliament in a
borderland UT is legally and politically complex
Short Term : Statutory strengthening of Hill
Councils via LAHDC Act amendment; guaranteed
recruitment reservations for domicile residents
Medium Term : Statehood with legislature, enabling
Ladakhis to legislate on local matters without Sixth
Schedule's NE-specific framework
Constitutional Constitutional amendment extending
Sixth Schedule or creating a Ladakh-specific
Schedule analogous to Article 371 special
provisions
Dialogue Revive HPC talks with a time-bound
mandate; include civil society alongside political
parties and Hill Councils in formal negotiations
Solutions
courses.atishmathur.com 	tracker.atishmathur.com 	upscpath.com

-- 27 of 30 --

Panchayats and Municipalities are the frontline of India's democracy — where policy meets people. Yet, despite
constitutional mandates, they often function as agents of the state rather than true representatives of the people
Intro
73rd and 74 CA, 1993 constitutionalised the Gandhian dream of democratic decentralisation	th
Despite Panchayats holding immense historical value in India as sabhas and samitis, the British Raj neglected
them and propelled municipalities for financial gain so much so that Lord Rippon is known as the father of self
government in India.
1.Panchayat Advancement Index published in 2025 by
MoPR is a multi-domain and multi-sectoral index that
is intended to be used to assess the overall holistic
development, performance & progress of panchayats
2.KN tops the Devolution Index 2024 released in Feb
2025 while UP and Bihar have shown tremendous
improvement
3.CAG Report on ULB show a 42% gap in resources and
expenditure among 18 states
4.MoPR Panel on elected women representatives formed
after a 2023 SC judgement calls for penalties and
serious punishments to combat issues of proxy
sarpanches : shows overall 49.5% women reps but
some states fall behind
Contemporary
Issues
Panchayats : Analysis
FRAMEWORK : Whether the basic provisions mentioned in the Constitution are adhered to by states?
Issues :
1.All states have enacted conformity laws and conducted elections; nearly 14
lakh women hold elected positions, ensuring the 1/3rd reservation with
instances of proxy posts, lack to autonomy
2.However, less than 20% of states have fully devolved all 29 subjects from the
Eleventh Schedule in both de jure and de facto terms.
3.Many states do not operationalise DPCs effectively or at all, despite
constitutional mandates
4.Many SFCs are either non-functional or their recommendations are ignored.
5.Regular elections are held, but timely conduct and delimitation remain
inconsistent in states like Jharkhand and Maharashtra.
Solutions
1.Mandate compliance auditing by
NITI Aayog or a designated
constitutional body on
constitutional provisions.
2.Use performance-linked Finance
Commission grants as an incentive
(as recommended by 15th FC).
3.Digitally monitor DPC meetings
and outputs via e-GramSwaraj.
FUNCTION: Measures how panchayats fulfilled civic responsibilities, from sanitation and waste management to health and education.
Issues :
1.Function overlaps with line departments.
2.Limited autonomy; Panchayats used more for last-mile scheme delivery, not governance.
3.Variability persists among states in assigning and letting Panchayats execute functions. For example, while Kerala and
Karnataka show vertical and horizontal convergence, several Northeastern and BIMARU states restrict real decision-making
autonomy
4.Many Panchayats excel in scheme implementation (MGNREGA, ICDS, Swachh Bharat Mission), but struggle with infrastructural
deficits, over-reliance on schemes,
Solutions
1.Convergence of schemes (e.g., integrating MGNREGA with agriculture extension, women SHGs running enterprises) delivers
practical improvements in livelihoods and service delivery.
2.Task-specific Activity Mapping across tiers.
3.Establish a statutory services list for exclusive Panchayat delivery (recommendation in Devolution Index1).
4.Incentivise SDG-localization via GPDPs with measurable service benchmarks.
Case Studies
1.National Panchayat Awards 2024, winning Panchayats like Galibeedu (Karnataka) achieved 100% social security pension
coverage, universal public distribution, and near-complete sanitation and nutrition services.
2.Perumpudappa (Kerala) deployed targeted subsidies in agriculture and dairy, reaching 3,000 families and delivering full PDS
and PMMVY coverage.
courses.atishmathur.com 	tracker.atishmathur.com 	upscpath.com
MCN 2.0
 	Magna Carta Mains 2026
Mains Concise Note (MCN) 29 : Panchayats

-- 28 of 30 --

FINANCES: The efficiency in the devolution of funds to panchayats and the sources of their funding, whether their own revenues,
borrowings, or state and Central grants.
Issues :
1.Decline in untied grants: From 85% (13th FC) to 60% (15th FC - ₹2.36 Lakh Cr)
2.Central and state grants form over 95% of Panchayat funds—mainly as tied/untied grants based on Finance Commission
recommendations
3.Only 47% of total SFC recommendations implemented
4.Delayed state releases—2023-24 saw numerous states disbursing less than 25% of obligations under FC
5.Centrally Sponsored Schemes like MGNREGA channel vast funds, but their tied nature reduces Panchayats’ autonomy
Case Studies
1.TN digitised property tax collection through Panchayat ERP, improving Own Source Revenue (OSR) by 18%
2.Odisha: strong SFC-led revenue-sharing
3.Sikkim: High GPDP convergence, full grant utilisation
4.Kerala’s participatory budgeting
Solutions
1.Constitution of a Consolidated Fund for Local Governments, as suggested by Upendra Baxi
2.Legislate minimum timelines for disbursal from state exchequers
3.Simplify and digitize tax collection (e.g., market fee, sanitation fee) with e-GramSwaraj integration
FUNCTIONARIES: Assessing the strength and performance of panchayat officials and infrastructure available to them
Issues
1.Many officials, particularly women and those from reserved categories, face educational and digital literacy barriers. Proxy
leadership (relatives acting for women sarpanches) remains a challenge where institutional training and support is weak
2.Most panchayats operate with inadequate technical/clerical staff. States like Bihar, UP, MP show less than 20% staff in place
compared to required numbers. (As of 2024, the average vacancy in Panchayat technical staff was 42% across India.)
3.Many states rely on honorary or contractual staff, affecting qualit
4.Gaps persist in offices, ICT tools, and basic amenities
5.Physical/digital infrastructure deficits persist in up to 60% of surveyed gram panchayats
6.Gram Sabha meetings poorly attended; only 15 states met annual quorum in >75% villages1
7.Funds audited but not acted upon
8.Limited awareness of entitlements by rural public
Case Studies
1.In Galibeedu (Karnataka), strong SHG networks and Panchayat-led training delivered both social and physical infrastructure
improvements (e.g., waste management units, cooperative factories
2.Odisha's SIRD implemented cascade training, e-learning modules, and hand-holding for over 38,618 participants annually,
dramatically improving functional capacity and local innovation
Solutions
1.Make participation in training compulsory for honoraria payments
2.Deploy mobile-based vernacular e-learning modules
3.Establish peer-to-peer knowledge exchanges modeled on Saansad Adarsh Gram Yojana villages and National Panchayat Awards
4.Gram Sabha meetings poorly attended; only 15 states met annual quorum in >75% villages
5.Social audit units (in sync with MGNREGA audits)
6.Gram Sabhas & GPDPs can serve as citizen oversight tools
7.Mandate minimum Gram Sabha frequency and agenda disclosure
8.Frame uniform Citizen Charter for Rural Service Delivery across states
courses.atishmathur.com 	tracker.atishmathur.com 	upscpath.com
MCN 2.0
 	Magna Carta Mains 2026
Mains Concise Note (MCN) 30 : Panchayats

-- 29 of 30 --

FRAMEWORK : Whether the basic provisions mentioned in the Constitution are adhered to by states?
Issues
1.DPCs/ MPCs are defunct or never formed in majority
states
2.Only 14 states conducted regular municipal elections in
last 5 years
3.Political and administrative resistance is more acute in
urban contexts
4.A few states lag in representation quotas and in setting
up empowered planning committees
5.Many functions remain under state control or are
exercised through parastatals or parallel bodies
Solutions
1.Encourage constitutional accountability audits
2.Use City Finance Rankings and Smart Cities
evaluation for planning compliance checks
FUNCTION: Measures how municipalities fulfilled civic responsibilities, from sanitation and waste management to health and
education.
Issues
1.Fragmented responsibilities (e.g.,
Jal Boards report to state, not
ULBs)
2.Diluted municipal authority amid
Smart City SPVs, AMRUT, etc.
3.Many tier-II and III cities face
backlogs in basic services like
solid waste management, housing,
and water supply—primarily due
to underfunding, staff shortages,
and overlapping jurisdictions.
Case Studies/Data
1.Indore has led six years in a row in Swachh
Survekshan, advancing door-to-door waste
collection and bio-CNG units
2.Over 45% of ULBs fail to meet service-level
benchmarks in water supply and waste
management
Solutions
1.Operationalise 18 functions of the
12th Schedule via exclusive activity
maps
2.Enact Municipal Services Cadre with
qualified urban planners and
engineers
FINANCES: The efficiency in the devolution of funds to municipalities and the sources of their funding, whether their own revenues,
borrowings, or state and Central grants.
Issues
1.Dependence on state and central grants is high,
with tied funding for centrally sponsored schemes a
dominant source.
2.Municipal bonds are legal, but low uptake (only 11
cities)
3.Loss of local taxes post-GST adoption have reduced
fiscal autonomy
4.Low property tax recovery (0.2% of GDP, far below
global average of 1%–2.5%)
Case Studies/Data
1.Pune and Ahmedabad have
used municipal bonds,
improving civic infrastructure
without aid delays.
2.Municipal revenues form just
1% of GDP (vs. 5-6% in
Brazil/South Africa)
Solutions
1.Digitally link property records with
tax platforms (e.g., GIS mapping)
2.Institutionalise credit rating systems
and allow pooled bonds for Tier-2
and Tier-3 cities
FUNCTIONARIES: Assessing the strength and performance of municipality officials and infrastructure available to them
Issues
1.Understaffing & deputation model weakens
city manager systems
2.No trained town planners, and planning done
by private consultants
3.Audit delay and weak compliance culture
4.No citizen audit or participatory budgeting in
most cities
5.Commissioner-led model limits autonomy of
elected councils.
Case Studies/Data
1.National Institute of Urban
Affairs, IIPA Urban Cell, and
AMRUT training modules
offer structural inputs
2.Surat and Pune’s adoption of
real-time digital reporting
3.Odisha's Urban Academy
integrates e-learning with on-
site exposure visits.
Solutions
1.Extend hands-on procurement,
finance, GIS, e-governance training
2.Incentivize cities achieving skill
milestones with ranking upgrades in
City Finance Index
3.Institute Ward Sabhas with statutory
powers
4.Mandate online disclosure of ULB
budgets, passed resolutions, and
social audits
If India is to become truly self-governing, its Panchayats and Municipalities must be more than administrative shells — they must become
engines of transformative change.
Municipalities : Analysis
courses.atishmathur.com 	tracker.atishmathur.com 	upscpath.com
MCN 2.0
 	Magna Carta Mains 2026
Mains Concise Note (MCN) 30 : Municipalities

-- 30 of 30 --

